

● Kernel architecture

  - Monolithic (Linux, BSD) — drivers, filesystem, networking all run in kernel space. Fast (no context switches between
   components), but a bug in any driver can crash the whole system.
  - Microkernel (Mach, seL4, MINIX 3) — kernel only handles IPC, scheduling, and memory. Everything else (drivers,
  filesystems) runs as userspace processes. More robust and modular, but IPC overhead between components can hurt
  performance.
  - Hybrid (Windows NT, macOS/XNU) — microkernel in theory, but performance-critical stuff gets pulled back into kernel
  space in practice.

  The debate has been going for 35+ years (the famous Torvalds vs. Tanenbaum argument). Microkernels have gotten faster,
   but monolithic still dominates in practice.

  Syscall interface style

  - Many specialized syscalls (Linux has ~450) — each operation gets its own syscall number. Simple to use, but the
  interface grows over time and accumulates legacy.
  - Few generic syscalls with message passing (microkernels, Plan 9's read/write on everything) — cleaner abstraction,
  but you end up encoding a lot of structure into messages/buffers.
  - Capability-based (seL4, Fuchsia) — syscalls operate on capability handles rather than global names. More secure by
  design, but very different programming model.
  - io_uring style submission queues — userspace writes requests into a shared ring buffer, kernel drains it. Avoids
  syscall overhead entirely for batched I/O. Could you design an OS where all kernel interaction works this way?

  Scheduling

  - Completely Fair Scheduler (Linux CFS, now EEVDF) — models fairness as a resource allocation problem, uses a tree of
  virtual runtimes. Good general-purpose behavior.
  - Priority-based with preemption levels (real-time OSes, Windows) — fixed priority levels, highest priority runnable
  thread always runs. Predictable latency, but priority inversion is a problem.
  - BFS / MuQSS (Con Kolivas's schedulers) — optimized for desktop interactivity over throughput. Simpler, arguably
  better for < 16 cores.
  - Per-CPU run queues vs. single global queue — per-CPU scales better but makes load balancing harder.

  Trade-off: throughput vs. latency vs. fairness vs. simplicity. No scheduler wins on all four.

  Memory: paging model

  - 4 KiB pages (standard on x86) — fine granularity, less waste, but huge page tables for large address spaces and TLB
  pressure.
  - Transparent huge pages (2 MiB / 1 GiB) — fewer TLB misses, but internal fragmentation and memory compaction
  overhead.
  - Variable page sizes — some architectures support this, but it massively complicates the page allocator.
  - Single address space OS (no per-process page tables, everything shares one address space, use capabilities/segments
  for protection) — radical simplification, but very different security model.

  Filesystem

  - Inode-based (ext4, XFS) — separate metadata structure pointing to data blocks. Battle-tested, well understood.
  - Copy-on-write / B-tree (Btrfs, ZFS) — never overwrites data in place, writes new copies. Gets you snapshots and
  checksums for free, but fragmentation and complexity.
  - Log-structured (F2FS, LFS) — all writes are sequential appends. Great for flash storage, but garbage collection is
  tricky.
  - Database-as-filesystem (WinFS, never shipped; BeFS was partially this) — rich metadata and queries built into the
  filesystem.

  Also: do you enforce a filesystem hierarchy (/usr/bin/...) or let it be flat with tags/attributes?

  IPC model

  - Everything is a file descriptor (Unix) — pipes, sockets, devices, even signals (signalfd) share one abstraction.
  Elegant, but you end up shoehorning things that aren't really byte streams.
  - Everything is a message/RPC (Mach, QNX, Fuchsia) — structured messages between processes. Cleaner for complex
  interactions, but more overhead for simple byte streaming.
  - Shared memory as the primary IPC — fastest possible, but now you need synchronization primitives and trust between
  processes.

  Driver model

  - In-kernel drivers (Linux) — maximum performance, but a buggy driver takes down the system. Drivers must be written
  in the kernel's language (C, now some Rust).
  - Userspace drivers (microkernels, Fuchsia, some USB/GPU drivers on Linux) — fault isolation, can restart a crashed
  driver, can write drivers in any language. But you need a way to handle interrupts and DMA from userspace efficiently.
  - Driver sandboxing (somewhere in between) — run drivers in kernel space but in restricted memory domains. IOMMU
  hardware helps with DMA isolation.

  Security model

  - DAC (discretionary access control) — traditional Unix permissions. User owns files, decides who can access them.
  Simple, but one compromised process has access to everything that user owns.
  - MAC (mandatory access control) — system-wide policy overrides user decisions (SELinux, AppArmor). Much stronger, but
   complex to configure and debug.
  - Capability-based — processes can only access objects they hold a capability (unforgeable token) for. No ambient
  authority. Theoretically the cleanest model, but existing software assumes ambient access to things like the
  filesystem.
  - Pledge/unveil (OpenBSD) — process voluntarily gives up syscalls and filesystem paths it doesn't need. Simple,
  practical, but relies on programs opting in.

  Graphics

  - Kernel-mode graphics driver with userspace compositor (Linux DRM/KMS + Wayland) — kernel handles mode setting and
  memory management, userspace handles window layout and compositing.
  - Kernel-mode compositor (Windows DWM historically had kernel ties via win32k) — lower latency for window management,
  but larger attack surface.
  - GPU as a first-class compute device — do you expose a low-level GPU command queue (like Vulkan), a high-level
  drawing API (like Skia/Cairo), or both? Do applications talk to the GPU directly or always through the compositor?

  Init / service management

  - Simple init + shell scripts (traditional Unix, OpenRC) — easy to understand, but slow sequential boot and no
  dependency tracking.
  - Parallel dependency-based (systemd, launchd) — fast boot, socket activation, supervision, but complex.
  - Supervision trees (Erlang-style, s6) — each process has a supervisor that restarts it on failure. Clean fault
  recovery model.

  ABI stability

  This is a policy decision more than a technical one, but it has massive consequences:

  - Stable syscall ABI forever (Linux — Torvalds's #1 rule) — programs compiled 20 years ago still run. But you can
  never fix a bad syscall design.
  - Stable API, unstable ABI (macOS, Fuchsia) — you recompile against new headers, but the kernel can change its
  internal interface. Allows fixing mistakes, but breaks binary distribution.
  - No stability guarantee (research OSes) — maximum freedom, but no ecosystem.

  ---
  These are roughly in order of how early you need to decide them — kernel architecture and syscall style shape
  everything downstream. What areas are you most interested in exploring further?

✻ Worked for 52s

> I have a lot of questions. Would you be able to answer them all fully in one pass, or should I ask each one in a
  separate request?

● Go ahead and ask them all at once. I can handle a long list in one pass.

> Are syscalls generally handled by end programmers, or are those underneath other abstractions? Because if the latter,
   then the "many spectialized syscalls" is worth the speed increase because programmers won't generally be using them.
   It might be worth it either way.

  What is a capability handle?

  " - io_uring style submission queues — userspace writes requests into a shared ring buffer, kernel drains it. Avoids
    syscall overhead entirely for batched I/O. Could you design an OS where all kernel interaction works this way?"

  I don't know, could it? You tell me. Do syscalls have to wait for the io_uring buffer to drain before they run
  otherwise? If not, then making them wait for the other batched i/o to run could potentially be a performance issue?
  Any other issues?

  " - Per-CPU run queues vs. single global queue — per-CPU scales better but makes load balancing harder." What do you
  mean by harder? I mean, is this a solved problem, but the only issue is that it's complex to implement?

  " - Variable page sizes — some architectures support this, but it massively complicates the page allocator.

  Is the complication a problem with allocation speed, or is it only a problem with programming complexity for the os
  programmer?

  " - Single address space OS (no per-process page tables, everything shares one address space, use
  capabilities/segments
    for protection) — radical simplification, but very different security model."

  How is the security model for that different?

  "- Copy-on-write / B-tree (Btrfs, ZFS) — never overwrites data in place, writes new copies. Gets you snapshots and
    checksums for free, but fragmentation and complexity."

  Could defragmentation work with this as a background process? Would this cause too much disk wear?
  As for the complexity, does the complexity slow down filesystem interaction? Even considering most filesystem
  activity is cached?

  " - Log-structured (F2FS, LFS) — all writes are sequential appends. Great for flash storage, but garbage collection
  is
    tricky"

  I don't understand. It sounds like you never lose any data this way. How is that great for flash storage? Flash
  storage is particularly limited in size. And if your point is to log everyhing, why do you need garbage collection?
  What are you collecting? What does "garbage collection" mean for a filesystem anyway?

  "  Also: do you enforce a filesystem hierarchy (/usr/bin/...) or let it be flat with tags/attributes?"

  what do you mean? give an example of how file/directory access would work with tags or attributes.

  "  - Everything is a file descriptor (Unix) — pipes, sockets, devices, even signals (signalfd) share one abstraction.
    Elegant, but you end up shoehorning things that aren't really byte streams."

  It sounds like this could cause a lot of awkwardness/hacks in how we use some byte streams?

  Having both file descriptiors for things that really are byte streams and message/RPC for everything else is good
  too, right? And how about offering everything as file descriptors *and* some or all things as message/rpc, so the
  programmer can choose whichever he wants? Is there any way to do that that wouldn't slow things down?

  And could we offer shared memory as a third IPC option the programmer can choose from?

  "- In-kernel drivers (Linux) — maximum performance, but a buggy driver takes down the system. Drivers must be written
    in the kernel's language (C, now some Rust)."

  We talked about how ada/spark would be a good way of writing drivers with proof that they won't crash the system, for
   use in the kernel, but our kernel is going to be written in Rust. Is there any way to do this?

  "- Driver sandboxing (somewhere in between) — run drivers in kernel space but in restricted memory domains. IOMMU
    hardware helps with DMA isolation." How common is IOMMU hardware on modern desktop computers, and what's the
  performance penalty for driver sandboxing both with and without IOMMU hardware, compared to the other driver models?

  "  - Capability-based — processes can only access objects they hold a capability (unforgeable token) for. No ambient
    authority. Theoretically the cleanest model, but existing software assumes ambient access to things like the
    filesystem."

  Would that really be a problem, considering that if someone wants to run existing software that needs, for example,
  the operating system, he'll be giving it the operating system capability anyway?

  Also, does existing software matter when no existing software will be compatible with our OS anyway? (Except through
  a WINE port, and it would also be nice to have something like WSL)

  And what about a combination of DAC and cababilities? It should basically be: There are different users, each with
  their own capability set, and a user can't create another user with a capability that it itself doesn't have, and
  user capabilities include access to specific files and directories. But then that means a user has to have thousands
  of capabilities, one for each file.. but then, we could just have named user capabilities and groups of named
  capabilities that we can assign to files and directories and a user with the same capability can access that file or
  directory.

  "  - Kernel-mode graphics driver with userspace compositor (Linux DRM/KMS + Wayland) — kernel handles mode setting
  and
    memory management, userspace handles window layout and compositing.
  "

  "  - Kernel-mode compositor (Windows DWM historically had kernel ties via win32k) — lower latency for window
  management,
    but larger attack surface." Is the latency really noticeable? I mean, window management isn't something that's done
   like millions of times per second, and the cost of a single IPC/API call is minute?

  And by "larger attack surface", do you mean larger chance of a graphics bug crashing the OS?

  "  - GPU as a first-class compute device — do you expose a low-level GPU command queue (like Vulkan), a high-level
    drawing API (like Skia/Cairo), or both? Do applications talk to the GPU directly or always through the compositor?"

  What do Windows and Linux do? Is "always through the compositor" fast enough for games, and does it allow all GPU
  features for any GPU a card a user would probably have?

  Also, no GPU as first-class compute device means that users can't use GPU for general computing -- e.g., AI.

  "  - Simple init + shell scripts (traditional Unix, OpenRC) — easy to understand, but slow sequential boot and no
    dependency tracking."

  What do you mean by "init" Like operating system bootup? And what would the shell scripts typically do? And what is
  "sequential boot", and why is it slow? Oh, I guess you mean that shell scripts mean the dependency processes boot
  sequentially, one script command at a time, and that makes it slower? Can't you simply have a script feature that
  allows launching a process and not waiting to the next script command?

  Regarding systemd, it seems most linux users use systemd, so it must be really useful, but they all seem to hate it.
  What does systemd do, and why do people hate it? Would something like systemd be a design choice for our OS, and if
  so, could it be made better?

  "  - Stable syscall ABI forever (Linux — Torvalds's #1 rule) — programs compiled 20 years ago still run. But you can
    never fix a bad syscall design."

  Why not just provide new syscalls to fix a bad syscall design that new programs can run, and keep the old syscalls
  for old programs?

  "  - Stable API, unstable ABI (macOS, Fuchsia) — you recompile against new headers, but the kernel can change its
    internal interface. Allows fixing mistakes, but breaks binary distribution."

  How does this break binary distribution?






● Syscalls and abstractions

  Yes, almost always behind abstractions. Application programmers call fopen(), malloc(), pthread_create() — C library
  functions that internally invoke syscalls. Even systems programmers rarely write raw syscall instructions. So you're
  right: having many specialized syscalls is fine. The speed benefit is real (the kernel can dispatch directly to a
  handler without parsing a generic message), and the complexity is hidden from application developers by libc.

  Capability handles

  A capability is an unforgeable token that grants a specific permission to a specific object. Think of it like a file
  descriptor, but generalized to everything.

  In a traditional OS: "I am user 501, I want to open /etc/passwd" — the kernel checks whether user 501 has permission.
  The process names a global path and the kernel decides.

  In a capability OS: the process holds a capability token that says "read access to this specific file object." It
  can't name arbitrary paths — it can only operate on objects it already holds capabilities for. If it doesn't hold a
  capability for /etc/passwd, it can't even attempt to open it. There's no global namespace to try.

  A process gets capabilities at launch (its parent gives them) or by receiving them via IPC from another process. You
  can think of Unix file descriptors as a limited form of capabilities — once you have fd 3, you can read/write it
  without further permission checks, and you can pass it to a child process.

  io_uring for everything

  The idea is feasible but has real trade-offs.

  How io_uring works: userspace writes request entries into a submission queue (a shared ring buffer in memory). The
  kernel picks them up, processes them, and writes results into a completion queue. No syscall needed per operation —
  you can batch dozens of requests and then do a single io_uring_enter syscall to tell the kernel "go," or even
  configure it to poll the queue automatically with no syscall at all.

  Could all kernel interaction work this way? Mostly, but some operations are inherently synchronous — exec replaces
  your entire process, fork needs to return a pid before you continue, mmap needs to return the address before you can
  use it. You'd need to either:

  - Block the userspace thread until the completion arrives (which defeats the purpose — it's just a syscall with extra
  steps)
  - Restructure all userspace code to be async (submit request, do other work, check completion later)

  The second approach is powerful but forces an async programming model on everything, which is a big ergonomic cost.

  Performance concerns: The ring buffer approach adds latency for individual operations (you write to a buffer, kernel
  polls or gets notified, processes, writes result, you poll or get notified). For high-throughput batched I/O this is a
   huge win because you amortize one syscall over hundreds of operations. For a single getpid() call, it's strictly
  worse than a direct syscall.

  A practical design: Offer both. Fast synchronous syscalls for things that need an immediate answer, and a submission
  queue for batched async I/O. This is essentially what Linux does today — traditional syscalls plus io_uring as an
  opt-in fast path for I/O-heavy workloads.

  Per-CPU run queues: is load balancing "solved"?

  It's solved in the sense that Linux ships a working implementation. But "harder" means ongoing performance trade-offs,
   not just implementation complexity:

  - A thread on CPU 0 finishes. CPU 0's queue is empty, CPU 3's queue has 4 threads. When does CPU 0 steal work from CPU
   3? Check too often and you waste time scanning other queues. Check too rarely and CPU 0 sits idle while CPU 3 is
  overloaded.
  - When you move a thread from CPU 3 to CPU 0, its data is hot in CPU 3's cache and cold in CPU 0's cache. The
  migration itself costs real performance (cache misses).
  - On NUMA systems, migrating across NUMA nodes is much more expensive than migrating within a node. So the balancer
  needs to be topology-aware.

  Linux's load balancer has been rewritten multiple times and still gets patches improving edge cases. It works, but
  there's no obviously optimal policy — it's a continuous engineering effort balancing responsiveness against migration
  cost.

  Variable page sizes: speed or complexity?

  Both, but primarily allocation speed.

  With fixed 4 KiB pages, the page allocator can use a buddy system — a simple, fast algorithm. Every page is the same
  size, so "find a free page" is straightforward.

  With variable page sizes, every allocation decision becomes: what size page should I use? Can I promote a group of
  small pages into one large page? Can I split a large page? This means:

  - Allocation is slower — more decisions per allocation, more bookkeeping
  - Fragmentation management is harder — to create a 2 MiB huge page, you need 512 contiguous free 4 KiB pages. The
  kernel may need to migrate existing pages around to create that contiguous block.
  - TLB management is more complex — the TLB now holds entries of different sizes, and flushing/invalidation logic is
  more involved.

  Linux's Transparent Huge Pages (THP) is essentially variable page sizes bolted onto a fixed-page allocator, and it's
  been a source of performance unpredictability for years — sometimes THP helps enormously, sometimes the background
  compaction work to assemble huge pages causes latency spikes.

  Single address space OS: security model

  In a traditional OS, each process has its own page table. Process A literally cannot address process B's memory — the
  hardware enforces this. Even if process A has a buffer overflow bug, it can only corrupt its own address space.

  In a single address space OS, all processes share one address space. Process A's code and process B's code and the
  kernel all have addresses in the same flat space. Protection must come from something else:

  - Software capabilities — every pointer is tagged with permissions, checked at access time (either in software, which
  is slow, or with special hardware like CHERI)
  - Segment-based protection — each process can only access its designated region, enforced by segment registers or
  bounds checking
  - Language-level safety — if all code is written in a memory-safe language (like Singularity OS, which required all
  code to be in managed C#), the compiler guarantees processes can't forge pointers into each other's memory

  The difference: traditional page tables give you hardware-enforced isolation "for free" with every memory access.
  Single address space requires either trusting the language/compiler, paying for software bounds checks, or having
  specialized hardware. The benefit is that sharing memory between processes becomes trivial (it's all the same address
  space), and context switches are cheaper (no page table swap).

  Copy-on-write filesystems: defragmentation and complexity

  Defragmentation as a background process: Yes, this is exactly what Btrfs does. It has an autodefrag mount option and a
   manual btrfs filesystem defrag command. It works, but:

  - Disk wear on SSDs: Defragmentation rewrites data to new locations. On HDDs this is clearly beneficial (sequential
  reads are much faster than seeks). On SSDs, there's no seek penalty, so the main benefit is reducing metadata overhead
   from scattered extents. The writes do consume flash write cycles, but modern SSDs have enough write endurance that
  moderate defragmentation isn't a concern. You wouldn't want to defragment aggressively on a continuous basis, but
  periodic defrag is fine.
  - Snapshots complicate defrag: If you have snapshots, defragmenting a file means the snapshot and the current version
  no longer share blocks. What was one copy of the data becomes two, increasing disk usage. This has bitten real Btrfs
  users badly.

  Does the complexity slow down filesystem interaction? Yes, measurably, but it depends on the operation:

  - Sequential reads/writes of large files: Roughly comparable to ext4. The data path is similar — read blocks from disk
   into page cache.
  - Metadata-heavy operations (creating many small files, fsync, directory operations): CoW filesystems are slower
  because every metadata change requires writing a new copy of the modified B-tree nodes all the way up to the root.
  Where ext4 does an in-place journal write, Btrfs does a CoW chain.
  - Random writes to large files: Worst case for CoW — each small write copies an entire block (or more due to B-tree
  updates). This can be 2-5x slower than ext4.
  - Caching helps: Yes, reads are almost entirely masked by the page cache. The overhead shows up on writes and on
  fsync/fdatasync (which must flush CoW chains to stable storage).

  ZFS and Btrfs are both production-grade, so the complexity is manageable, but ext4 still wins on raw throughput for
  simple workloads, which is why it remains the default on most Linux distros.

  Log-structured filesystems

  I wasn't clear enough. A log-structured filesystem doesn't keep all data forever — it's not a log in the "audit trail"
   sense. The name means the write pattern is log-like: all writes go sequentially to the end.

  Here's how it works:

  Time 1: Write file A      [AAAA____________]
  Time 2: Write file B      [AAAABBBB________]
  Time 3: Modify file A     [AAAABBBBAA'A'___]  (new version of A's blocks appended)
  Time 4:                    [^^^^        ]  old A blocks are now garbage

  After Time 3, the original A blocks at the beginning are stale — they've been superseded by the new A' blocks. But
  they haven't been overwritten because the filesystem only appends.

  Why great for flash: Flash memory can't overwrite a cell — it must erase an entire block (128+ KiB) before rewriting
  it. Sequential appends align perfectly with this: you fill one erase block, move to the next, never need to
  erase-then-rewrite in the hot path. Traditional filesystems that do in-place updates fight the flash hardware (the
  SSD's internal firmware, the FTL, does its own log-structuring to compensate, which is redundant work).

  Garbage collection means reclaiming those stale blocks. Eventually the disk fills up and you have segments that are a
  mix of live and stale data:

  [live|stale|stale|live|stale|live|stale|stale]

  The GC reads the live data out of a mostly-stale segment, rewrites it to the current append point, and frees the
  entire segment for reuse. This is tricky because:

  - It consumes read and write bandwidth (write amplification)
  - Choosing which segments to clean (and when) affects performance significantly
  - Under heavy write load with a nearly full disk, GC can't keep up and throughput collapses

  This is the same fundamental problem SSD firmware has internally (FTL garbage collection), which is why F2FS (designed
   by Samsung for their SSDs) tries to coordinate with the flash GC rather than fighting it.

  Tags/attributes instead of hierarchy

  Here's the concept. Traditional filesystem:

  /home/user/photos/vacation/2024/beach.jpg

  To find this file, you must know or navigate the exact path. The directory hierarchy is the only organizational
  structure.

  Tag-based filesystem:

  beach.jpg
    tags: [photo, vacation, 2024, beach, family]

  To find this file:
  search(tags: photo AND vacation AND 2024)  →  [beach.jpg, sunset.jpg, hotel.jpg]
  search(tags: photo AND beach)              →  [beach.jpg, beach2.jpg, coast.jpg]
  search(tags: family AND 2024)              →  [beach.jpg, birthday.jpg, ...]

  The file isn't "in" any single directory. It has multiple tags and can be found through any combination of them. A
  "directory" is just a saved query — "vacation/2024" is syntactic sugar for tags: vacation AND 2024.

  Real examples:
  - Gmail uses labels instead of folders — one email can have multiple labels
  - macOS Finder supports file tags (colored labels + custom tags) alongside the traditional hierarchy
  - BeOS/Haiku's BFS has queryable file attributes built into the filesystem

  Trade-offs: Very flexible for personal organization, but most existing software assumes a hierarchical path. You'd
  likely want to support both — a traditional hierarchy for compatibility and a tag/attribute layer on top for search
  and smart views.

  File descriptors: awkwardness

  Yes. The classic examples of shoehorning into byte streams:

  - ioctl — the escape hatch. When a device doesn't fit the read/write model, you call ioctl(fd, MAGIC_NUMBER, data).
  There are thousands of ioctl commands across Linux. It's type-unsafe (the kernel casts a void* based on the magic
  number), hard to version, and a common source of security bugs.
  - /proc and /sys — process info and kernel tunables exposed as fake text files. Want to change a scheduling parameter?
   Write a string to a file. It works, but parsing text to configure the kernel is fragile and slow.
  - Sockets — read/write work, but you also need sendmsg/recvmsg with complex msghdr structures for ancillary data
  (passing file descriptors, getting sender credentials). The byte stream abstraction leaks everywhere.
  - Signals over file descriptors (signalfd, timerfd, eventfd) — bolted on later because people needed signals to work
  with epoll. Each creates a new fd type with its own read format.

  Offering both fd and message IPC

  Yes, this is a viable design. Fuchsia does something like this — it has channels (message-passing with capability
  transfer) as the primary IPC, and sockets (byte streams) as a simpler option for when that's what you actually want.

  Can you offer both without slowing things down? Yes, because the choice is per-communication-channel, not a global
  mode. You're not adding overhead to byte streams by also supporting messages. Internally they'd be separate kernel
  objects with separate code paths.

  Shared memory as a third option: Absolutely. This is standard practice already. Many high-performance systems use
  shared memory for the data plane and messages/fd for the control plane (set up the shared region, negotiate the
  protocol, then communicate at memory speeds with no kernel involvement).

  The programmer picks based on the use case:
  - Byte stream (fd): piping data between processes, network I/O, simple serial communication
  - Structured messages: RPC, requesting services from other processes, passing capabilities
  - Shared memory: high-bandwidth data exchange (video frames, audio buffers, database pages), lockless queues between
  processes

  Offering all three is good design, not overengineering. They serve genuinely different needs.

  In-kernel Rust drivers and formal verification

  You mentioned Ada/SPARK for proving driver correctness. With a Rust kernel, your options:

  - Rust's type system and borrow checker already prevent most memory safety bugs (use-after-free, buffer overflows,
  data races) at compile time. This is weaker than SPARK's formal proofs (you can't prove functional correctness — "this
   driver correctly implements the spec"), but it catches the class of bugs that most commonly crash kernels.
  - Unsafe Rust is unavoidable in drivers (hardware register access, DMA buffer management). The strategy is to minimize
   unsafe blocks and wrap them in safe abstractions. The Linux kernel's Rust-for-Linux project does exactly this.
  - Kani and Creusot are Rust verification tools. Kani (by Amazon) does bounded model checking — it can prove that a
  Rust function has no panics, overflows, or assertion violations for all inputs up to a certain size. Creusot allows
  writing SPARK-style contracts (preconditions, postconditions, loop invariants) in Rust and proving them. Neither is as
   mature as SPARK, but both are actively developed.
  - You can call Ada/SPARK from Rust via FFI. Write the safety-critical driver logic in SPARK, prove it, compile it, and
   link it into the Rust kernel. This is unconventional but technically works — both languages produce standard object
  files. The interface boundary would need careful design (unsafe Rust FFI calls to SPARK functions, with Rust wrappers
  providing safe abstractions).

  Practically, for your OS: write drivers in Rust, keep unsafe minimal and audited, use Kani for critical paths. If you
  later find you need stronger guarantees for a specific driver, you can write that one in SPARK and link it in.

  IOMMU and driver sandboxing

  How common is IOMMU? Every Intel CPU since ~2013 (Haswell) and every AMD CPU since ~2011 has IOMMU support (Intel VT-d
   / AMD-Vi). On modern desktop hardware, it's universal. However, it's sometimes disabled in BIOS by default — you may
  need to enable it.

  Performance of driver sandboxing:

  With IOMMU:
  - DMA operations go through the IOMMU's page table, adding one translation step. For bulk transfers this is negligible
   (maybe 1-3% overhead). For many small DMA operations, the overhead is higher due to IOMMU TLB misses — maybe 5-10%.
  - The real cost is setup: programming IOMMU page tables when creating DMA mappings. For drivers that set up long-lived
   mappings (GPU, NVMe), this is a one-time cost. For networking with many short-lived packet buffers, it's measurable.

  Without IOMMU (software-only sandboxing):
  - You'd need to bounce-buffer all DMA — the driver writes to a buffer in its restricted domain, the kernel copies it
  to the real DMA-accessible memory. This roughly doubles memory bandwidth for DMA-heavy operations. 20-50% throughput
  hit for disk/network I/O.
  - Or you simply trust the driver for DMA and only sandbox its CPU memory access (using page tables / MPK). This
  protects against bugs in the driver's logic but not against it programming the device to DMA to arbitrary memory.

  Userspace drivers (full microkernel style):
  - Every driver interaction requires IPC (context switch, message copy). Overhead depends heavily on IPC speed — L4
  microkernels achieve ~1000 cycle IPC, which adds maybe 5-15% overhead for I/O-heavy drivers compared to in-kernel.
  - This is why all modern microkernels focus obsessively on IPC performance.

  Summary: With IOMMU (available on all modern desktops), in-kernel sandboxed drivers can approach native performance
  (low single-digit % overhead). Without IOMMU, you either accept incomplete isolation or pay a significant DMA tax.

  Capability-based security and compatibility

  "Won't users just give the filesystem capability anyway?" For running a random legacy app, probably yes — you'd grant
  it broad filesystem access and it would work. But you lose the security benefit. The power of capabilities is
  fine-grained delegation: "this photo editor can access ~/photos and nothing else." If you always grant everything,
  you're back to DAC.

  "Does existing software matter for our OS?" You're right that if you're building a new OS with no binary
  compatibility, the existing software argument is much weaker. Your applications will be written (or ported) for your
  OS, so they can be designed around capabilities from the start. This is actually a significant advantage —
  capability-based OSes like Fuchsia struggle with POSIX compatibility, but you don't have that constraint if you're
  designing applications for your own system.

  Your DAC + capabilities hybrid: What you're describing is converging toward something like Capsicum (FreeBSD) or
  Fuchsia's namespace model. Let me untangle the design:

  Your instinct to avoid "thousands of capabilities per file" is right. Here's how to think about it:

  - Capabilities are not per-file. A capability is a handle to any kernel object — a file, a directory, a socket, a
  device, a process. A capability to a directory grants access to everything inside it (like file descriptors to
  directories in Capsicum).
  - Users/groups are an organizational layer on top. A user identity determines what capabilities a process receives at
  launch. The kernel doesn't check user IDs — it only checks capabilities. User IDs are a policy concern handled by the
  login/session manager.
  - Named capability sets (what you called "groups of named capabilities") are essentially roles or profiles. "The web
  browser role gets: network access, the downloads directory, GPU access, the display server, and nothing else."

  So the architecture would be:
  1. Kernel only knows about capabilities (unforgeable handles to objects)
  2. A userspace policy service maps user identity + application identity → a set of capabilities
  3. When you launch an app, the launcher gives it only the capabilities its role specifies
  4. The app literally cannot name or access anything it wasn't given

  This is clean, enforceable, and doesn't require per-file capability lists.

  Graphics: kernel vs. userspace compositor latency

  Is the latency noticeable? For window management operations (open, close, resize, move), no. These happen at
  human-interaction speed — a few microseconds of IPC overhead is invisible.

  The latency concern is about the input-to-display pipeline for every frame:

  Input event → app renders frame → submit to compositor → compositor composites → display

  If the compositor is in userspace, the "submit to compositor" step is an IPC + buffer copy (or GPU buffer handoff). On
   Wayland, this is well-optimized using shared memory / DMA-BUF and adds maybe 100-200 microseconds. For a 60 Hz
  display (16.6 ms per frame), that's ~1% overhead. For competitive gaming at 360 Hz (2.7 ms per frame), it starts to
  matter, but even then, Wayland compositors achieve acceptable latency.

  Windows' win32k.sys kernel compositor wasn't faster because it avoided IPC — it was in the kernel for historical
  reasons (dating back to Windows NT 4.0, when they moved GDI into kernel space for performance on 1996 hardware).
  Modern Windows actually does most compositing in the userspace DWM process.

  "Larger attack surface" = crashes? Partly, but more about security. win32k.sys has been the single largest source of
  Windows kernel privilege escalation exploits for decades. A bug in a userspace compositor can crash your desktop
  session. A bug in a kernel-mode compositor can give an attacker full kernel access.

  GPU access: what Windows and Linux do

  Linux:
  - Applications can submit GPU command buffers directly (Vulkan/OpenGL talk to the DRM kernel driver, bypassing the
  compositor for rendering)
  - The compositor only composites the final output — it takes each application's rendered buffer and combines them onto
   the screen
  - Fullscreen games can bypass the compositor entirely (DRM direct scanout — the app's buffer is displayed directly
  with no compositing step)

  Windows:
  - Similar model. Applications submit GPU commands directly via the WDDM driver model
  - DWM composites the final output
  - Fullscreen "exclusive" mode historically bypassed DWM; modern Windows uses "fullscreen optimizations" that keep DWM
  in the loop but detect single-app-fullscreen and optimize the composite to a no-op

  Is "always through compositor" fast enough for games? The rendering isn't through the compositor — applications talk
  to the GPU directly for their own rendering. The compositor only handles the final "put all the windows on screen"
  step. So yes, games get full GPU access with all features. The compositor path for the final display adds minimal
  overhead, and fullscreen bypass eliminates even that.

  General-purpose GPU compute (AI, etc.): This is independent of the compositor question. Compute shaders / CUDA /
  OpenCL go directly from the application to the GPU driver. No compositor involvement at all. You'd need to support
  this in your GPU driver model — expose compute queue submission alongside graphics queue submission. On Linux, this
  goes through DRM/KMS. Your OS would need an equivalent kernel interface for GPU memory management and command
  submission.

  Init systems

  What is init? The first userspace process the kernel launches after boot (PID 1). Every other process is a descendant
  of init. Its job: bring up the rest of the system (mount filesystems, start networking, launch login, start services
  like a web server or database).

  Shell scripts: Traditionally, init runs scripts like /etc/init.d/networking, /etc/init.d/sshd, etc. Each script starts
   one service (calls the daemon binary, writes a PID file, sets up environment).

  Why sequential is slow: A naive init script does:

  start_service networking     # wait until networking is up
  start_service dns            # wait until DNS is up
  start_service sshd           # wait until sshd is up
  start_service database       # wait until database is up
  start_service webserver      # wait until webserver is up

  Each line waits for completion before the next starts. If networking takes 2 seconds and each service takes 1 second,
  that's 6 seconds total.

  Can't you just background them? Yes (start_service sshd &), and some init systems do this. But then you hit the
  dependency problem: the webserver needs the database, which needs networking. If you launch everything in parallel,
  the webserver might try to connect to the database before it's ready. You need a dependency graph and something to
  track "service X is actually ready" (not just "the process started"). This is exactly what systemd does.

  systemd: what it does and why people hate it

  What it does:
  - Parallel service startup based on a dependency graph
  - Socket activation — creates the socket before starting the service. If a client connects before the service is
  running, the connection queues. The service starts on demand and inherits the socket. This means you can "start
  everything at once" without dependency ordering in many cases.
  - Service supervision — restarts crashed services automatically
  - Resource management — uses cgroups to limit CPU/memory/IO per service
  - Logging (journald) — structured binary logs, queryable
  - Timer units (replaces cron), mount units (replaces fstab entries), device units, and more

  Why people hate it:
  - Scope creep — it started as an init system and absorbed DNS resolution (resolved), network configuration (networkd),
   logging (journald), device management (udevd), login management (logind), container management (nspawn), boot
  management (bootctl), timers, and more. People feel one project shouldn't own all of this.
  - Binary logs — journald stores logs in a binary format, not plain text. This breaks grep/awk/tail -f workflows that
  Unix admins have used for decades. You need journalctl to read logs.
  - Complexity — unit files are simpler than shell scripts for common cases, but the full system is enormous and the
  documentation is vast. Debugging a boot failure requires understanding systemd internals.
  - "Not Unix philosophy" — Unix tradition says each tool should do one thing well. systemd does many things in one
  tightly integrated project. Proponents argue that tight integration is the point (socket activation requires
  coordination between init and the socket manager).
  - Lennart Poettering — the lead developer has an abrasive communication style that alienated parts of the community.
  This is petty but genuinely fueled the backlash.

  For your OS: You'll need a service manager. The core ideas from systemd — dependency-based parallel startup, socket
  activation, automatic restart, cgroup resource limits — are genuinely good and worth adopting. What you can improve:

  - Keep it modular. The service manager doesn't need to also be the DNS resolver and the log manager.
  - Use structured logs but keep them in a text-based format (JSON lines, for example) so standard tools still work.
  - Make the dependency model simple and explicit rather than having dozens of implicit ordering rules.

  Stable ABI: why not keep old syscalls?

  That's exactly what Linux does. When a syscall design is bad, they add a new one and keep the old one working forever.
   Examples:

  - select → poll → epoll (three generations of I/O multiplexing, all still work)
  - stat → stat64 → statx (each fixing limitations of the previous)
  - clone → clone3 (better thread/process creation)

  The cost is: the kernel carries every old syscall forever. Linux has ~450 syscalls, many of which are superseded
  versions that still need to be maintained, tested, and kept secure. It works, but it's a maintenance burden that grows
   monotonically.

  The alternative (what you might consider for a new OS) is versioned syscall tables. An application declares "I target
  OS API version 3" and gets the v3 syscall table. Version 4 can break or remove old syscalls. Old apps still work
  because the kernel keeps the v3 table around. This is cleaner than accumulating individual deprecated syscalls because
   you can drop an entire old API version once no apps target it. Android sort of does this with its targetSdkVersion —
  apps declare what API level they were built for, and the OS adjusts behavior accordingly.

  Stable API / unstable ABI: binary distribution

  "ABI" means the binary-level calling convention: what number does syscall X have, what size is struct stat, what's the
   layout of function arguments.

  If the ABI is unstable, a binary compiled against OS version 1 might call syscall number 47 expecting "open file," but
   OS version 2 renumbered that to syscall 52. The binary crashes or does something wrong.

  How this breaks binary distribution: You can't download a precompiled binary (like a .deb or .rpm package) and run it
  on a different OS version. You must compile from source against the headers for your specific OS version. This means:

  - No universal binary packages
  - Package managers must compile per-version (like Homebrew on macOS, or ports on FreeBSD)
  - Commercial closed-source software can't ship a single binary

  macOS gets away with this because Apple controls the whole stack — Xcode rebuilds against the latest SDK, and the App
  Store distributes version-specific binaries. On Linux, where distros and applications are decoupled, this would be
  unworkable, which is why Torvalds insists on ABI stability.

  For your OS, this is a real choice. Stable ABI gives you an ecosystem where people can distribute binaries. Unstable
  ABI gives you freedom to fix mistakes, but requires something like app-bundled libraries or a universal package build
  system to compensate.

✻ Crunched for 3m 36s

────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
> So in capability based syscalls, a process would have to be passed a full list of directories and files it can
  access, like with Docker?
  eeeInstead, we could pass it a user capability that automatically gives it access to files according to which user
  capability groups each file/directory has. But then that's already handled by our security model, so there's no need
  to have capabilities in our syscalls to? Or does one depend on the other?

  "  The second approach is powerful but forces an async programming model on everything, which is a big ergonomic
  cost.
    - Restructure all userspace code to be async (submit request, do other work, check completion later)"

  Would it be possible to make this easy with futures, promises, deferreds, or callbacks?"

  "  Performance concerns: The ring buffer approach adds latency for individual operations (you write to a buffer,
  kernel
    polls or gets notified, processes, writes result, you poll or get notified). For high-throughput batched I/O this
  is a
     huge win because you amortize one syscall over hundreds of operations. For a single getpid() call, it's strictly
    worse than a direct syscall."

  But isn't high-throughput i/o the only time where latency really matters? E.g., if you're running a single getpid()
  call, you won't notice the latency.

  But I guess it doesn't matter, you're right, we should offer both. I think the idea is to make all syscalls have a
  submission queue option?

  I don't understand your answer about per-cpu queues. per-cpu queues seems to imply that a queue is cpu-specific,
  another. the performance hit only exists in the case where you balance processes across all cpus. so the only
  question is, is the performance hit of copying the process to another cpu worth the time it saves by running it on
  the other cpu instead of waiting till the original cpu has a core free.

  is F2FS free, is it only usable on samsung ssds, is it only optimal on samsung ssds?

  " - You can call Ada/SPARK from Rust via FFI. Write the safety-critical driver logic in SPARK, prove it, compile it,
  and
     link it into the Rust kernel. This is unconventional but technically works — both languages produce standard
  object
    files. The interface boundary would need careful design (unsafe Rust FFI calls to SPARK functions, with Rust
  wrappers
    providing safe abstractions)."

  If I have to call the ada program with FFI, that defeats the purpose, because it slows it down and the point of
  proving correctness is to be able to safely run them in kernel mode because that's faster. BUT, proving correctness
  is useful anyway because a driver crashing is inconvenient either way. BUT, isn't FFI unacceptably slow compared to
  normal IPC?

  What's faster and better between sandboxed drivers with IOMMU and userspace drivers?

  "For your OS, this is a real choice. Stable ABI gives you an ecosystem where people can distribute binaries. Unstable
    ABI gives you freedom to fix mistakes, but requires something like app-bundled libraries or a universal package
  build
    system to compensate."

  Aren't keeping old syscalls and adding new ones to fix ABI and versioned syscall tables both fine for not breaking
  binary distributions?

● Capabilities vs. user-based security model

  You're right that there's overlap, but they operate at different levels:

  User/group permissions (your security model) answer: "Who is allowed to access this file?" The kernel checks user ID
  against file permissions on every open() call. The process names a global path, the kernel decides yes or no.

  Capability-based syscalls answer: "What can this process do right now?" The process can only operate on objects it
  holds handles to. It can't name global paths at all — there's no open("/etc/passwd"), only read(handle) where the
  handle was given to it at launch.

  You don't have to pick one. Your idea of user capability groups that map to file access is effectively the user/group
  model with better granularity. That works fine. You'd use traditional syscalls (open with a path, kernel checks
  permissions).

  If you also wanted capability-style syscalls, the benefit is defense in depth within a user session. Without
  capabilities, every process running as user X can access everything user X can. Your web browser, your text editor,
  and a random downloaded program all have identical access. With capabilities, you can launch the browser with only
  ~/Downloads and network access, even though user X owns the whole home directory.

  But you're right that you can defer this. A user/group model with good granularity is a solid starting point.
  Capability-style sandboxing (like Pledge/Unveil, or Capsicum) can be layered on later without changing the syscall
  interface — it's additive.

  Async syscalls and ergonomics

  Futures/promises making it easy: Yes, this is exactly the right approach. You'd provide a userspace library where:

  // Synchronous (traditional syscall underneath)
  let data = file.read(buf);

  // Async (submission queue underneath, but feels similar)
  let data = file.read_async(buf).await;

  The .await suspends the current task, the runtime submits the request to the ring buffer, runs other tasks, and
  resumes this one when the completion arrives. The programmer writes nearly-linear code. Rust's async/await is
  particularly good at this — zero-cost futures, no heap allocation per await point.

  The ergonomic cost I mentioned is if async is the only option. If you offer both sync and async syscalls (which we
  agreed on), then programmers who don't want async just use the sync versions. No problem.

  Ring buffer latency

  You're partially right. For a single getpid(), the latency is so small in absolute terms (maybe 100ns vs 50ns) that no
   human notices. But there are cases where single-syscall latency matters even though it's not "high-throughput I/O":

  - Latency-sensitive request handling — a web server handling one request might make 10 syscalls (accept, read, stat,
  open, read, write, close...). If each is 2x slower, the per-request latency doubles. At scale, tail latency matters.
  - Syscalls in tight loops — a program calling clock_gettime thousands of times per second to timestamp events.

  But your instinct is sound: offer both, default to synchronous, and use the ring buffer when you're doing batched I/O.
   Making all syscalls available via the submission queue is fine — the overhead only matters if someone actually uses
  it for the wrong workcase, and that's their choice.

  Per-CPU queues clarified

  I think I confused the picture. Let me re-explain.

  The scenario is: you have 8 CPUs and 20 runnable threads. Where do you put them?

  Single global queue:
  Global queue: [T1, T2, T3, T4, T5, ... T20]
  Each CPU grabs the next thread when it's free.
  Simple. Perfect load balance — no CPU is ever idle while work exists. But every CPU contends on the same queue lock.
  At 8 CPUs, manageable. At 128 CPUs, the lock becomes a bottleneck.

  Per-CPU queues:
  CPU 0 queue: [T1, T5, T9, T13, T17]
  CPU 1 queue: [T2, T6, T10, T14, T18]
  CPU 2 queue: [T3, T7, T11, T15, T19]
  CPU 3 queue: [T4, T8, T12, T16, T20]
  CPU 4-7: empty

  No lock contention — each CPU accesses its own queue. But now CPUs 4–7 are idle while CPUs 0–3 have 5 threads each.
  This is when work stealing happens: idle CPU 4 notices it has nothing to do, looks at CPU 0's queue, and takes T17.

  Your question was essentially: is the cost of migrating T17 from CPU 0 to CPU 4 worth it? And the answer is almost
  always yes — an idle CPU doing nothing is wasting far more time than the cache miss penalty of moving a thread. A
  cache refill might cost 10–100 microseconds. An idle CPU wastes the entire time until it would otherwise get work —
  potentially milliseconds.

  The "hard" part isn't deciding whether to migrate — it's the tuning:
  - How often do idle CPUs check other queues? (Checking has overhead even when there's nothing to steal.)
  - Which CPU's queue do you steal from? (Prefer same NUMA node — stealing across NUMA costs 3–5x more in cache miss
  penalty.)
  - How many threads do you steal at once? (Taking half the victim's queue amortizes the stealing overhead, but may
  over-correct.)
  - When do you migrate back? A thread that got stolen to CPU 4 has now built up cache state there. If CPU 0 becomes
  idle, should it steal the thread back? Probably not — let sleeping threads lie.

  This is a well-studied problem with good solutions (Linux's CFS/EEVDF load balancer works), but the optimal thresholds
   depend on hardware topology, workload characteristics, and cache sizes. There's no single set of numbers that's best
  for all machines.

  F2FS

  - Free and open source — GPL, included in the mainline Linux kernel since 2012.
  - Works on any block device — SSDs from any manufacturer, eMMC, SD cards. It's not Samsung-specific hardware. Samsung
  engineers developed it, but it's a standard filesystem.
  - Optimized for flash in general, not Samsung flash specifically. It's aware of flash erase block sizes and write
  patterns. Works well on any NAND flash. It's the default filesystem on most Android phones (all vendors, not just
  Samsung).
  - Not ideal for HDDs — the log-structured design assumes fast random reads (true for SSDs, not HDDs).

  FFI performance

  FFI (Foreign Function Interface) between Rust and Ada/SPARK is not slow. You might be thinking of IPC (inter-process
  communication), which involves context switches. FFI is just a function call across language boundaries — at the
  binary level, it's identical to a normal function call. The CPU doesn't know or care what language produced the
  machine code.

  Rust function calling Rust function:  CALL instruction → execute → RET
  Rust function calling SPARK function: CALL instruction → execute → RET  (same thing)

  The only overhead is that the Rust compiler can't inline or optimize across the FFI boundary. For a driver function
  that does substantial work (handling an interrupt, processing a command), the call overhead is negligible.

  So the approach is: write driver logic in SPARK, prove it correct, compile it to a .o file, link it into the kernel,
  call it from Rust via FFI. It runs in kernel space at full speed. The FFI cost is effectively zero for any non-trivial
   function.

  Sandboxed in-kernel drivers vs. userspace drivers

  ┌──────────────┬───────────────────────────────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────────────────┐
  │              │           Sandboxed in-kernel (with IOMMU)            │            Userspace drivers            │
  ├──────────────┼───────────────────────────────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────────────────┤
  │ Performance  │ Near-native. ~1-3% overhead from IOMMU translation.   │ ~5-15% overhead from IPC per driver     │
  │              │                                                       │ interaction.                            │
  ├──────────────┼───────────────────────────────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────────────────┤
  │ Fault        │ Partial. Driver can't corrupt kernel memory, IOMMU    │ Full. A crashed driver is just a        │
  │ isolation    │ blocks rogue DMA. But a stuck driver can still hold   │ crashed process. Restart it. Other      │
  │              │ kernel locks or consume kernel resources.             │ processes are unaffected.               │
  ├──────────────┼───────────────────────────────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────────────────┤
  │              │ Difficult. Unloading a misbehaving in-kernel module   │ Clean. Kill the process, restart it.    │
  │ Recovery     │ while the system is running is fragile.               │ The service manager handles this        │
  │              │                                                       │ automatically.                          │
  ├──────────────┼───────────────────────────────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────────────────┤
  │ Development  │ Must use kernel APIs, kernel build system, limited    │ Normal userspace development. Can use   │
  │ ease         │ libraries.                                            │ any libraries, any debugger, any        │
  │              │                                                       │ language.                               │
  ├──────────────┼───────────────────────────────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────────────────┤
  │              │ Smaller attack surface than unsandboxed, but the      │ Driver runs with minimal privileges.    │
  │ Security     │ driver is still inside the kernel's address space. A  │ Compromising it gives you only that     │
  │              │ sandbox escape = kernel compromise.                   │ driver's capabilities.                  │
  └──────────────┴───────────────────────────────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────────────────┘

  For your OS, my recommendation: Use userspace drivers as the default. The performance cost is small on modern hardware
   and the robustness benefits are large. For the few drivers where that 5-15% matters (GPU, NVMe on very
  high-throughput workloads), offer the option of in-kernel sandboxed drivers. This gives you a safe default with an
  escape hatch for performance-critical paths.

  ABI stability and binary distribution

  Yes, you're right. Both approaches preserve binary distribution:

  Old syscalls + new syscalls (Linux approach):
  - Binary compiled against old API calls syscall #47 (open). That still works forever.
  - New binary calls syscall #52 (openat2). Also works.
  - Binary distribution is fine — any binary runs on any future kernel.
  - Cost: every old syscall is maintained forever. Kernel accumulates legacy.

  Versioned syscall tables:
  - Binary compiled for API v3 gets the v3 table. Works on any kernel that supports v3.
  - Binary compiled for API v5 gets the v5 table with breaking changes.
  - Binary distribution is fine — the binary declares its version, kernel dispatches accordingly.
  - Cost: the kernel maintains N tables instead of accumulating individual syscalls. You can eventually drop old
  versions (e.g., "we no longer support API v1 binaries, recompile").

  Both work for binary distribution. The versioned approach is arguably cleaner because you can deprecate and eventually
   remove entire old versions instead of carrying individual legacy syscalls forever. The Linux approach is more
  conservative — nothing ever breaks, period.

  The macOS "unstable ABI" approach is the one that actually breaks binary distribution, and it's the outlier. You don't
   have to do that. Either of the two approaches you identified is fine.

✻ Crunched for 1m 14s

> So my understanding is that a single queue for all cpus is fine up to a large number of cpus, and this os is designed
   for normal desktop use, so there's no reason not to use a single queue.

● Not quite. The lock contention problem shows up earlier than you might expect. It's not just about the number of CPUs
  — it's about how frequently threads are scheduled and descheduled.

  On a desktop, you might have 8–16 cores and hundreds of threads (browser tabs, background services, GUI events). Every
   time a thread blocks on I/O, wakes up from sleep, or exhausts its time slice, the scheduler touches the queue. That
  can be thousands of queue operations per second.

  With a single global queue protected by a lock, every one of those operations contends on that lock. On a modern
  8-core desktop, this is measurable but probably not a user-visible problem — maybe a few percent of scheduler
  overhead. On a 16-core system under heavy multitasking, it starts to hurt more.

  But the bigger issue isn't the lock — it's cache behavior. When CPU 0 picks a thread off the global queue, it modifies
   the queue data structure. That cache line is then invalidated on CPUs 1–7. When CPU 1 next touches the queue, it
  takes a cache miss. This "cache line bouncing" scales poorly with core count — each added CPU makes every other CPU's
  queue access slightly slower.

  Per-CPU queues with work stealing avoid both problems: no shared lock, no cache line bouncing in the common case. The
  work stealing path (idle CPU checks another CPU's queue) is the rare case.

  My honest recommendation: Per-CPU queues with work stealing are not significantly harder to implement than a single
  global queue — the basic algorithm is straightforward. The tuning is where complexity lives, but you can start with
  simple defaults (idle CPU steals half the longest queue, prefer same NUMA node) and refine later. Every modern
  general-purpose OS uses per-CPU queues for good reason, and even for a desktop-focused OS, it's the right starting
  point. A single global queue would work, but you'd likely end up replacing it once you start profiling.

────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
> 
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
  ? for shortcuts



> Regarding capability-based syscalls being more secure, i still haven't created a good mental model of how capability
  syscalls work. What ultimately grants the app permission to use a specific capability for a syscall? I mean, if the
  syscall itself contains the capability, then the app gets to choose what capabilities it hsa..

● The capability isn't data the app puts in the syscall — it's a handle the kernel tracks per-process, like a file
  descriptor.

  Think about how file descriptors work today:

  fd = open("/home/user/doc.txt")   // kernel checks permissions, returns fd 3
  read(3, buf, size)                // kernel doesn't recheck permissions — fd 3 is proof

  The process can't just invent read(7, ...) and get access to something — fd 7 doesn't exist in its table unless
  someone gave it one. The kernel maintains a per-process table of valid file descriptors. The process can only use
  entries that exist in its table.

  Capability-based syscalls extend this to everything:

  // Process starts with a capability table:
  //   cap 0 = directory handle to /home/user/
  //   cap 1 = network (TCP outbound only)
  //   cap 2 = display server connection
  //   (nothing else)

  // To open a file, you use a directory capability:
  fd = open_at(cap 0, "doc.txt")     // works — cap 0 grants /home/user/

  fd = open_at(cap 0, "../../etc/passwd")  // kernel rejects — traversal outside cap scope

  open("/etc/passwd")                // doesn't exist as a syscall — no global open

  connect(cap 1, "1.2.3.4", 80)     // works — cap 1 grants TCP outbound

  listen(cap 1, port 8080)          // rejected — cap 1 is outbound only

  raw_disk_access(???)              // no capability for disk — can't even attempt it

  Who decides what capabilities a process gets? Its parent — the process that launched it. Ultimately, the chain goes:

  1. Kernel boots, gives init all capabilities
  2. Init gives the login manager a subset (user management, display, etc.)
  3. Login manager authenticates user, gives the user session capabilities based on your user/group security policy
  4. User launches browser, the session manager gives it only: network, ~/Downloads, display, GPU
  5. Browser can't pass capabilities it doesn't have — it can't give a plugin disk access if it doesn't have disk access
   itself

  The kernel's job is simple: maintain each process's capability table, reject any syscall that references a capability
  the process doesn't hold, and ensure capabilities can only be delegated downward (a process can pass a subset of its
  capabilities to a child, never create new ones).

  The process never "chooses" its capabilities. It receives them from its parent, and can only give away (or narrow)
  what it already has.

> What if you wanted to give a user access to a complete filesystem except for one directory?

● Good question — this is a real ergonomic problem with pure capabilities.

  The naive approach: You'd have to enumerate every directory the user can access and grant a capability for each. If
  the filesystem has 50 top-level directories and you want to exclude one, you grant 49 capabilities. Ugly, and breaks
  every time someone creates a new directory.

  The practical approach: Make capabilities support deny rules. Grant one capability for the root filesystem, with an
  exclusion attached:

  cap 0 = filesystem "/" EXCEPT "/secret-dir"

  The kernel checks: does the path fall within the grant? Is it excluded? This is simple to implement — the capability
  carries a small deny list.

  How real systems handle this: This is actually where pure capability models get awkward and why most practical systems
   use a hybrid. With traditional permissions, this is trivial — just remove read permission on that one directory. The
  deny case is the natural default (no access unless granted), and you add one exception.

  For your OS with user/group permissions as the base layer, this scenario is already handled by the permission model.
  Capability-based syscalls would be an additional layer for sandboxing specific applications, not a replacement for the
   permission system. The browser doesn't need access to the full filesystem minus one directory — it needs access to
  two directories. That's where capabilities shine. The "full access minus exceptions" case stays with the permission
  model.

> But browser needs access to the full filesystem because the user may want to download a file to a particular
  directory. I do this all the time. But there are certain directories the browser shouldn't get access to.

● You're right, that's a realistic use case. A few ways to handle it:

  1. Deny lists on capabilities (what I just described)

  cap = filesystem "/" EXCEPT ["/secret-dir", "/other-secret"]

  Clean, but now the kernel needs to check a deny list on every path resolution. Small cost, and the deny list needs to
  be maintained — if you create a new sensitive directory, you have to remember to add it to the browser's deny list.

  2. The browser asks when it needs access

  The browser doesn't hold a filesystem capability at all. When the user clicks "Save As," the browser asks the desktop
  environment (which does have filesystem access) to show a file picker dialog. The user picks a directory. The desktop
  environment grants the browser a one-time, scoped capability for that specific directory.

  // Browser has no filesystem capability at startup
  // User clicks "Save As"
  // Browser sends request to desktop environment: "I need to save a file"
  // Desktop environment shows native file picker dialog
  // User selects ~/Documents/reports/
  // Desktop environment grants browser: cap = write to ~/Documents/reports/ (one file, one time)
  // Browser saves the file
  // Capability expires

  The browser never sees the filesystem tree. It can't browse directories. The user is always in control of what the
  browser accesses, through a trusted system component (the file picker) that the browser can't tamper with.

  This is what macOS sandboxed apps, Flatpak on Linux, and Android's Storage Access Framework actually do today. It's
  considered the best practice for sandboxed applications.

  3. Tag sensitive directories instead of listing them per-app

  In your permission model, mark certain directories with a "restricted" attribute. Any capability that grants
  filesystem access automatically excludes restricted directories unless the capability explicitly includes the
  "restricted-access" permission. So:

  cap = filesystem "/" (does not include restricted dirs by default)
  cap = filesystem "/" WITH restricted-access (full access, only for trusted apps)

  You maintain the sensitivity on the directory, not on every app's capability. New sensitive directory? Mark it
  restricted once, all sandboxed apps are excluded automatically.

  ---
  Option 2 is the strongest security model — the browser never has ambient filesystem access, period. Option 3 is the
  most convenient — the browser can save anywhere non-sensitive without a dialog. You could combine them: use option 3
  for the normal case, and if the user wants to save into a restricted directory, it escalates to option 2's file-picker
   flow.

> Regarding scheduling with different priority levels, what is priority inversion?

● A low-priority thread holds a lock. A high-priority thread needs that lock. The high-priority thread blocks, waiting
  for the low-priority thread to release it.

  But here's the problem: a medium-priority thread is runnable. The scheduler runs the medium thread (it's higher
  priority than the low thread). The low thread is starved — it can't run, so it can't release the lock, so the high
  thread stays blocked.

  The high-priority thread is effectively stuck behind the medium-priority thread, even though it has higher priority.
  The priority order has been inverted.

  High priority:   [running] → [blocked on lock] → [still blocked...] → [still blocked...]
  Medium priority: [waiting] → [waiting]         → [RUNNING]          → [RUNNING]
  Low priority:    [RUNNING, holds lock] → [preempted by medium] → [can't run] → [can't run]

  The high thread is waiting for the low thread, but every medium-priority thread in the system gets to run before the
  low thread. If there's a steady stream of medium-priority work, the high-priority thread waits indefinitely.

  The classic real-world case: The Mars Pathfinder (1997) hit this bug. A high-priority bus management task blocked on a
   lock held by a low-priority meteorological task, while medium-priority communication tasks kept preempting the
  low-priority one. The system watchdog detected the high-priority task wasn't running and kept resetting the
  spacecraft.

  Solutions:

  - Priority inheritance — when the high thread blocks on a lock held by the low thread, temporarily boost the low
  thread to the high thread's priority. Now the medium thread can't preempt it, the low thread finishes quickly,
  releases the lock, drops back to low priority. This is what fixed Pathfinder (they enabled it remotely).
  - Priority ceiling — every lock is assigned a ceiling priority (the highest priority of any thread that might use it).
   When a thread acquires the lock, it runs at the ceiling priority. Simpler, but requires knowing in advance which
  threads use which locks.
  - Lock-free data structures — avoid the problem entirely by not using locks. Not always possible.

 Do BFS / MuQSS (Con Kolivas's schedulers) support priority levels? Because an OS may want to run an app that it's
  crucial to run at a high priorit.

● Yes, BFS/MuQSS support priority levels — they use the standard Linux nice levels (-20 to +19) and real-time priority
  classes (SCHED_FIFO, SCHED_RR). Any process can be given higher or lower priority.

  The difference from CFS/EEVDF isn't whether priorities exist, but how fairness is computed among threads at the same
  priority. BFS uses a simpler model: each thread gets a time slice based on its priority, and when all threads at a
  given priority have used their slices, the round resets. CFS uses a more mathematically rigorous virtual runtime model
   where threads that have consumed less CPU time get preferentially scheduled.

  Kolivas's argument was that on a desktop with fewer than ~16 cores, the simpler model produces better interactive
  responsiveness (lower latency for the foreground app, smoother mouse movement, less audio stuttering) because the
  scheduler itself does less bookkeeping work per scheduling decision. CFS was designed for server workloads with
  hundreds of cores and thousands of threads, where the overhead pays off in better throughput and fairness at scale.

  For your desktop-focused OS, the takeaway: you definitely want priority levels. The choice between CFS-style virtual
  runtime fairness and BFS-style round-robin simplicity is a real one, and for desktop use, simpler may genuinely be
  better. You can always add a more sophisticated scheduler later if you need server workloads. Start with something
  simple that has priority support and priority inheritance for locks.

─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

What paging models do Windows and MACos use? 4kib pages, transparent huge pages, or variable-size pages?

● Windows:
  - Base page size: 4 KiB
  - Large pages: 2 MiB, but opt-in only — applications must explicitly request them via VirtualAlloc with the
  MEM_LARGE_PAGES flag, and the user account needs the "Lock Pages in Memory" privilege. No transparent promotion.
  - Windows chose the explicit approach because large pages are locked in physical RAM (can't be paged to disk), so
  letting apps use them without restriction could exhaust physical memory.

  macOS (Intel):
  - Base page size: 4 KiB
  - Large pages: 2 MiB, available via mach_vm_allocate with a superpage flag. Like Windows, opt-in only.

  macOS (Apple Silicon / ARM64):
  - Base page size: 16 KiB — this is the notable difference. Apple chose a larger base page from the start.
  - This means fewer TLB entries needed, fewer page table entries, less page fault overhead — but slightly more internal
   fragmentation (a 1-byte allocation still uses 16 KiB of physical memory).
  - Apple could do this because they control the hardware and the entire software stack. Linux on ARM supports both 4
  KiB and 16 KiB base pages as a compile-time option, but most distros choose 4 KiB for compatibility.

  Linux:
  - The only major OS using Transparent Huge Pages — the kernel automatically promotes groups of contiguous 4 KiB pages
  into 2 MiB pages in the background, without application involvement. As mentioned earlier, this helps when it works
  but causes latency spikes from the background compaction work.

  For your OS, the interesting question is base page size. 4 KiB was chosen in the 1980s when RAM was measured in
  megabytes. With 16–64 GB being common on desktops today, 16 KiB (like Apple) wastes a trivial amount of extra memory
  but meaningfully reduces TLB pressure and page table size. If you're designing from scratch with no legacy constraint,
   16 KiB is worth considering. The trade-off is that memory-mapped I/O granularity increases (smallest file mapping is
  16 KiB), which wastes space for very small files, but this is a minor concern.

 Would combining IOMMU sandboxing and ada/spark compilation with ffi communication for a driver be possible?

● Yes, and there's no conflict between them — they protect against different things.

  SPARK proves the driver logic is correct: no buffer overflows, no integer overflows, no invalid state transitions. The
   driver code does what its specification says.

  IOMMU sandboxing constrains what the hardware device can do via DMA. Even if the driver is perfectly correct, the
  hardware itself could be malicious (think a compromised USB device or PCIe card) or have firmware bugs that cause it
  to DMA to unexpected addresses. The IOMMU prevents the device from accessing memory outside its assigned regions,
  regardless of what the driver tells it to do.

  FFI is just how you call the SPARK code from Rust. As I mentioned, it's a normal function call at the machine level —
  no performance cost beyond the inability to inline across the boundary.

  So the layers would be:

  Application
      ↓ syscall
  Rust kernel (safe code)
      ↓ FFI call (near-zero cost)
  SPARK driver logic (proven correct, runs in kernel space)
      ↓ programs the device
  Hardware device
      ↓ DMA (device accesses RAM)
  IOMMU (restricts which RAM the device can touch)
      ↓ allowed DMA only
  Physical RAM

  SPARK protects you from software bugs in the driver. IOMMU protects you from the hardware misbehaving. They're
  complementary. And because the SPARK code runs in kernel space via FFI (not in a separate userspace process via IPC),
  you get near-native performance with both protections active.

  The only cost is the 1-3% IOMMU overhead on DMA operations, which you'd pay regardless of whether the driver is
  written in SPARK or plain Rust. The SPARK part adds zero runtime cost — 

 I guess an OS needs a package manager?

● Yes, unless you expect users to compile everything from source. The core job is: download software, put it in the
  right place, track what's installed, handle dependencies, and allow clean removal.

  The main design decisions:

  Binary vs. source packages:
  - Binary (apt, pacman, rpm) — precompiled, fast to install. You or a build infrastructure compiles everything in
  advance.
  - Source (Gentoo's portage, FreeBSD ports) — compiles on the user's machine, allows custom optimization flags and
  feature toggles. Slow to install.
  - Both (Nix, AUR alongside pacman) — binary packages by default, source builds as a fallback or option.

  For a desktop OS, binary packages as the default is the obvious choice. Source builds as an option is nice but not
  essential early on.

  Dependency handling:
  - Shared dependencies (apt, pacman) — if five apps need libpng, one copy is installed and they all use it. Saves disk
  space. But updating libpng can break an app that depends on the old version ("dependency hell").
  - Bundled dependencies (Flatpak, Snap, macOS app bundles) — each app ships its own copy of everything it needs. No
  conflicts, but wastes disk space and security updates to a library must be applied to every app that bundles it.
  - Content-addressed store (Nix, Guix) — each exact version of each library lives at a unique path derived from its
  hash. Five apps can share the exact same libpng build, but if one needs a different version, both coexist without
  conflict. Most elegant solution, but the most complex to implement.

  Package format:
  This is just "what's in the archive." At minimum: the compiled files, metadata (name, version, dependencies), and
  install scripts if needed. Whether it's a tarball, a custom binary format, or a directory structure is mostly an
  implementation detail.

  Repository model:
  - Centralized (Debian, Fedora) — one official repo, curated and tested. Consistent quality, but slow to update and
  someone has to maintain it.
  - Decentralized / user repos (AUR, PPAs) — anyone can publish packages. More software available, faster updates, but
  quality and security vary.

  Atomic updates and rollback:
  This is where newer package managers shine. If an update breaks something:
  - Traditional (apt, pacman) — you're partially updated, rolling back means manually downgrading packages. Messy.
  - Atomic (Nix, OSTree/Silverblue) — the entire system state is versioned. An update either fully applies or doesn't.
  Rolling back is switching a pointer to the previous state. This is essentially the copy-on-write filesystem concept
  applied to package management.

  For your OS, my suggestion: Look at Nix's model seriously. The content-addressed store solves dependency hell cleanly,
   atomic updates and rollback are built-in, and it works well for a from-scratch OS where you're not constrained by
  legacy package format choices. The learning curve for Nix-the-tool is widely criticized, but the underlying model is
  sound — you'd be implementing your own tool with a better interface on top of the same ideas.

> How are dependency security updates done with Nix?

● When a library gets a security patch in Nix, the new version gets a new hash and a new store path:

  /nix/store/abc123-libpng-1.6.39/    (old, vulnerable)
  /nix/store/def456-libpng-1.6.40/    (new, patched)

  Every package that depends on libpng is then rebuilt against the new version, producing new store paths for those
  packages too:

  /nix/store/ghi789-firefox-120/      (old, linked against abc123-libpng)
  /nix/store/jkl012-firefox-120/      (new, linked against def456-libpng)

  The old versions remain on disk (nothing breaks mid-update), and once the user switches to the new generation, the old
   versions become garbage and can be collected.

  The downside: A security fix in a low-level library (openssl, glibc, zlib) triggers a rebuild of everything that
  depends on it, which can be hundreds of packages. The Nix build infrastructure (Hydra) does this centrally and users
  download the prebuilt binaries, so users don't have to compile anything. But someone has to run that build
  infrastructure, and a single openssl patch means rebuilding and re-downloading a large portion of the package set.

  Compare with traditional shared dependencies (apt/pacman): update the one libpng .so file in place, and every app that
   dynamically links to it automatically uses the patched version. No rebuilds. One small download. Much faster to
  deploy.

  This is the real trade-off:

  ┌─────────────────────────────┬─────────────────────────────────────────────┬────────────────────────────────────┐
  │                             │        Shared libraries (apt/pacman)        │      Content-addressed (Nix)       │
  ├─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────────────────────┼────────────────────────────────────┤
  │ Security patch deployment   │ Replace one file, instant                   │ Rebuild and redistribute all       │
  │                             │                                             │ dependents                         │
  ├─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────────────────────┼────────────────────────────────────┤
  │ Risk of patch breaking      │ Higher — all apps forced onto new version   │ Lower — atomic switch, easy        │
  │ something                   │ immediately                                 │ rollback                           │
  ├─────────────────────────────┼─────────────────────────────────────────────┼────────────────────────────────────┤
  │ Certainty that patch is     │ High — one copy, everyone uses it           │ High — but only after rebuild      │
  │ applied                     │                                             │ propagates                         │
  └─────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────────────────────┴────────────────────────────────────┘

  Possible middle ground for your OS: Use content-addressed packages for isolation and rollback, but support dynamic
  linking within a generation. Within one system generation, apps share .so files. A security update rebuilds the shared
   library and creates a new generation where apps point to the new .so. You get fast security patches (rebuild one
  library, not every dependent) with atomic rollback (switch generation pointer). The cost: you lose Nix's guarantee
  that each package is fully self-describing, and you reintroduce the possibility of a shared library update breaking an
   app (though rollback mitigates that).

 I think I solved how to make certain directories restricted using my capabilities system. A file or directory can
  have multiple capabilities associated with it so that all of them are required to access that file or directory. So,
  e.g., there could be one "filesystem" capability for everything that all subdirectories inherit, and then a "system"
  capability on some subdirectories that a user or program can't access unless he has the "system" capability.

● That's a clean design. The key insight is that capabilities compose via intersection (AND) rather than union (OR) — so
   adding a capability to a directory only ever restricts access, never broadens it. A process that has the filesystem
  capability can see most things, but the moment it hits a directory tagged with filesystem + system, it needs both or
  it's locked out.

  A few thoughts:

  Inheritance semantics are natural. A child directory inherits its parent's capability set, and can only add more
  requirements. That means the root of a filesystem tree sets the floor (e.g., filesystem), and sensitive subtrees layer
   on additional requirements (system, hardware, audit, whatever). No subtree can ever be less restricted than its
  parent, which is the right default.

  It maps well to real use cases. A regular user program gets filesystem at launch. It can read /home, /tmp, /usr/share
  — anything tagged with just filesystem. But /sys, /proc, /etc/shadow require filesystem + system, so the program can't
   touch them without explicit privilege escalation. A system daemon gets both capabilities at launch and sees
  everything.

  The interesting question is capability granting. How does a process acquire the system capability? Some options:
  - Statically at launch time (like Unix setuid — the binary's metadata says "this process starts with system")
  - Dynamically via a broker (the process asks a privileged service "may I have system?" and gets it if policy allows)
  - Temporarily scoped (the process gets system for one operation, then it's revoked)

  The third option is the most powerful for least-privilege — a package manager could get system just for the duration
  of the install operation, then lose it.

  One edge case to think about: can a directory require a capability that no process has? That would make it permanently
   inaccessible (useful for sealed audit logs or write-once storage). Is that intentional in your model, or would you
  prevent it?

✻ Cogitated for 58s

> Regarding the edge case, I was imagining the kernel would naturally be able to bypass all capability restrictions.
  The only other option is to have anything and everything on the system except for the write-once storage to have the
  "kernel" capability. But then that doesn't work either, because the capabilities work by AND, so no userpsace
  anything wouldn't be able to access anything.

● Right, you need the kernel to be outside the capability system entirely — it's the enforcer, not a participant. If you
   tried to model the kernel as "has all capabilities," you'd need to enumerate them, and any new capability someone
  invents would need to be retroactively added to the kernel's set. And as you noted, putting a kernel capability on
  every directory would break userspace since they'd all suddenly require it.

  So the clean model is:

  - Kernel: bypasses capability checks entirely (it's the one doing the checking)
  - Userspace processes: subject to capability checks, hold some subset of capabilities
  - Filesystem objects: tagged with a set of required capabilities

  The kernel sees the raw filesystem. Capability enforcement is a layer the kernel applies to userspace access requests.
   Similar to how Unix root bypasses permission bits — the permission system doesn't apply to the entity enforcing it.

  For the write-once storage case, you could handle it differently: instead of a capability nobody has, make it a
  filesystem-level flag — immutable or append-only — that the kernel itself honors. The kernel could override it, but
  chooses not to during normal operation. That's distinct from the capability system and arguably belongs at a different
   layer anyway, since it's about the nature of the storage, not about who can access it.

  That gives you a clean separation:
  - Capabilities answer: "which processes can reach this?"
  - Filesystem flags answer: "what operations are allowed on this, period?"

  A sealed audit log would be append-only (filesystem flag) + system + audit (capabilities). Only processes with both
  capabilities can even see it, and even they can only append.