somewhere down the road, we may want to implement a VM for Linux like WSL2. we could take the good ideas of Windows' Hypervisor that apply to our OS and build something similar, and/or take the good ideas of VMWare and/or VirtualBox. QEMU is another important VM to consider, except that I think it's very slow? of course, the VM Linux would share the filesystem, clipboard, window manager, GPU driver, etc. with the host., just like with WSL2. maybe we could add this to roadmap-detailed.md but as something optional to consider adding later when everything else is done. 

"""
Here's what I actually found — you're partly right, but the picture is a bit different from "todo.txt ≈ roadmap.md."

todo.txt is 53,118 lines and is really a giant #-prefixed engineering journal. Breaking down its ~section headings:
~40 DONE: + 15 VERIFIED: — detailed completion records (each ABI batch: verbatim Linux source, divergence analysis, self-test, "build clean / clippy / BOOT_OK").
~90 BUG, 8 DIVERGENCE, 7 LIMITATION, 16 FIX/FIXED — bug and limitation notes.
~5 IN PROGRESS, 4 DEFERRED, 2 JUDGMENT — forward-looking / deferred work.

So the overlap is real but broader than you framed it. todo.txt currently duplicates three other things:
roadmap.md — the DONE records re-state status that roadmap.md already tracks with checkboxes.
git commit messages — each DONE: ABI batch NNN entry is essentially a copy of that commit's body.
known-issues.md — the BUG/DIVERGENCE/LIMITATION entries are exactly what known-issues.md exists for.

Where I'd push back on "merge into roadmap.md": dumping a 53k-line journal into roadmap.md would bloat the one file that should stay scannable. roadmap.md's value is being a concise status index. The right move isn't to grow it — it's to stop todo.txt from being a catch-all.

My recommendation (the clean structure CLAUDE.md already implies):
roadmap.md — status source of truth (checkboxes), stays concise.
known-issues.md — all bugs / divergences / limitations / tech-debt (move the ~115 BUG/DIVERGENCE/LIMITATION entries here over time).
git history — the changelog; the verbose per-batch DONE records mostly live in commit messages already.
todo.txt — reserved for genuine open TODOs, judgment calls, and deferred-with-rationale items. Much smaller.

There's also a doc contradiction worth resolving: roadmap-detailed.md says "todo.txt is the operator's personal file — AI does not write to it," while CLAUDE.md explicitly tells me to write to it (and it's full of my entries). We should pick one.

This is your call (it's your file and a workflow policy). Options:
(A) Leave it as-is — it works, it's just redundant.
(B) Adopt the structure above going forward (no mass rewrite): new bugs → known-issues.md, new completions → just the commit + roadmap checkbox, todo.txt only for open items. The 53k-line backlog stays as a historical journal.
(C) Same as B plus I do a one-time migration/prune of the existing todo.txt (move bugs to known-issues.md, archive the DONE-changelog).

I'd suggest (B) — lowest risk, fixes the sprawl going forward, no risky bulk surgery on a huge file. Want me to go with that, and should I record whichever you pick in design-decisions.md? (Background note: the batch-553 boot-test is still running; I'll report it when it lands.)
"""if you think it'll make things less chaotic for you, you should do B. and you've already thoroughly taken over my todo.txt, so go ahead and change it so that both the sources say it's yours. but note that you said that judgment calls should stay in todo.txt, and we already made separate .md file- to keep track of judgment calls (one for resolved judgment calls, one for judgment calls waiting for my input). i do want all the issues to be in known-issues.md, but we can make the move less risky by not deleting them from todo.txt either, OR deleting them from todo.txt as you move them but making a backup of todo.txt before you start.





[ANSWERED 2026-06-13 → see operator-answers-2026-06-13.md] Your comments below
are addressed there (NUMA/UMA explanation + option-C overhead for Q1; overcommit
explanation, your options 4 & 5 confirmed-already-built, and the "default default"
for Q2; toolchain ordering + the fastpy/CPython correction for Q3). Two small
confirmations are awaiting your word (Q1 keep option A; Q2 keep shipped defaults);
neither blocks the toolchain work, which is proceeding. Original comments preserved:

---

regarding Q1 it open-questions.md, what are the advantages of being a UMA system versus being a NUMA system? and regarding option C, I guess that creates a CPU and memory overhead? how much overhead? i really have no understanding of what NUMA or VMA or UMA means, so I can't think about whether there might be a better fourth option.  also i don't have any clear answers for options A and B on what the end results might be on trying to run native programs and linux programs and what percentage of programs they might affect. 

regarding option Q2, i think the biggest con for option A is one you didn't mention under cons but mentioned before then: that some apps might refuse to start. regarding option C, you said that some readers treat it as an error, does that mean the program might not run? just log noise is okay as a tradeoff for optimal behavior (as in the biggest number of programs (especially important programs) run and don't crash)

i think there's a fourth option for Q2: let the user modify this value per program according to whatever issues they have (but that still leaves in question what the default should be. that could be modifiable by the user, too, then we'd just need to decide a default default). but we'd need to offer an explanation of the issue and how to solve it that makes itself obvious when the OS detects that a program is having or may be having issues due to proc/sys/vm/overcommit_memory.

a fifth option for Q2 is to actually create both memory strategies and allow the user to configure which one to use system-wide, and use overcommit_memory = 0 for linux programs by default but let the user change that too, as a default for all linux programs, and per linux program. and allow the user to change the value per non-linux program too. all Q2 options would be flagged as 'advanced options' under settings, possibly with warnings (and/or there may be a general warning for all advanced options that changing them could cause problems).

Q3: let's do the terminal stuff before the GUI stuff, that seems intuitive to me. i'd think we should port the GCC/CMake/Make toolchain first before porting bash, because doing the latter will make doing the former easier or possible, no? it may not even be necessary to port CPython because we've done everything we could (in other sessions for another project) to make fastpy as fully compatible with CPython 3.14 and bug-free as we can, and it's many many times faster than CPython, so maybe we should work on porting that before CPython if we haven't already ported it.

write all your answers to these comments to an .md file (maybe even open-questions.md if you think that's the most appropriate place).


