F-Q2: do vp9. if possible, find or write hardware encoders and decoders for it (preferably find), and also have cpu fallback either way - multithreaded according to the number of cores in a user's system. 
F-Q1: AVIF: yes. HEIC: i don't really understand 'obliges you to let users replace that library with their own build', what could be the problem with that? seems like something trivial to implement.
A-Q14: A
A-Q15: I'd like to actual empirical tests, using real world conditions, including some extreme ones but not too unrealistic, to see what's worse - the slowness of A or the memory consumption of B. But I don't know if that's possible under QEMU because it runs more slowly than realtime. If it's not, then log it somewhere that we need to test this once the OS is tested on bare metal. Another possibility would be to have the OS support both A and B, and if B runs out of memory, then drop back to A, ideally with some connection shuffling so that the ones that need the speed of B the most get B, unless this possibility just isn't a good option. 
C-Q26: A, but C should be implemented in addition - just not as the same function that saves the user's data. 
C-Q25: A and B, making it totally clear to the user that A is an insecure option to use. One other way we could support is for a program to read the passwords directly from the password manager over a secure connection, but only if it has the privilege - a capability key specifically for this? A security popup in the password manager to allow or disallow and show the program's credentials? (I think the former option would naturally imply the latter too.)
C-Q24: To enable by default: Alt+F4, Ctrl+F4 (close local window/tab like on Windows), Ctrl+C, Ctlrl+V, what is Ctrl+X?, Ctrl+Z, Ctrl+Shift+Z (redo, and we should have an actual redo tree whenever possible for things that support redo--add that to the roadmap), PrtScrn (or Alt+PrtScrn for the entire screen and Ctrl+PrtScrn for the current window, like on Windows?) (also we should allow a PrtScrn combination that prompts to save it as a file--one for the current window, one for the entire screen),  WindowsKey/whatever for the start menu, WindowsKey/whatever+R, I guess WindowsKey/whatever+tab is okay--wait, on second thought, whatever it offers, just have it in alt+tab and don't have WindowsKey/whatever+Tab so we don't have to have two ways of alt+tabbing, but maybe add which behavior Alt+Tab uses to the settings.
I'm not sure about volume up/down/mute, brightness up/down, they should definitely exist as options (and easily discoverable ones), but whether they should be on by default depends on where they tend to be on the keyboard. I think generally they tend to be way up top in tiny keys where nobody would accidentally type, and if so, it's okay to enable them by default.
Available, but not by default: Snap left/right, minimize, maximize, show desktop, what is zone overlay?, next/previous desktop (this is the one that's the biggest pain for me), notifications, task manager, settings, lock, what is shortcut card?, a key to put the monitor to sleep
B-Q8: I want a way to ask the terminal how wide it will draw something as part of the protocol. It will be an addition purely for programs made for Slate OS, so it won't interfere with POSIX or whatever, is that fine? Regarding which table to keep, you say that bash and GNU tools will not be running on Slate OS, only reimplementations, so does that not mean that, regardlress of which we keep, nothing will show up improperly (because our own implementations will naturally know the correct table to use)? If that's the case, just do whichever looks the best, or whichever you want. 
Though one thing that concerns me is the decision to make the renderer obey the table rather than vice versa--what if the glyph it's trying to render doesn't agree with the table in the current font? Wouldn't you either get a glyph printed too wide or too narrow?
C-Q11: I still don't understand why not only check once a day to save time, well I guess it's because if something's wrong it makes various lanes' boot tests fail? Idk, do what you want - maybe research to see how much time it costs to check, under heavy load, since my machine seems to be loaded all the time nowadays, compared to how much time was empirically saved the  few times it actually caught an error, or would have caught an error, that wouldn't have been caught otherwise?
One thing I've been thinking about is whether the testings can actually be broken into separate parts that can be independently checked under QEMU. I guess not? What if we add a pathway into the running OS (I guess through QEMU) that can build and run things inside the OS? Then we can test changes without a full boot of Slate OS every time? Also, we could target tests by reading one of the files that describe the architecture of the OS to let us know what areas might be affected by a given change?

---------------

^ sent

C-Q15: Can't you do A and save accent and whatever other UI colors per desktop theme, so switching to filled theme won't keep their previous accent change? Another option, if you think it's better to carry accent, etc. changes across themes, is to measure all the contrasts whenever they switch to the filled theme and then if something isn't enough then ask the user if they want to reset the colors to default for the theme, or maybe if they want to do color settings per theme (and then reset to the default for the theme if they do)?
C-Q16: C, and I'll let Claude decide which games get which treament. One other thing: try to make the games look as polished as possible.
C-Q17: Option A. I think I saw somewhere in C-Q17 that one of the five finished features already has a wired up version of itself. If true, make the one that survives have all the features of both versions. 
C-Q18: Claude's recommendation. By the way, make a set of pointers is available that are visible on both light and dark scenes, if you didn't already - for example, dark pointers with a light outline or light pointers with a dark outline - I forget which is typically done - or a set of pointers that are XORd with the screet data behind them. 
C-Q20: I've been seeing a long history of various things getting multiple implentations, surely there's something you can do to claude.md to change how the agents communicate to solve the problem? Here's one example: whenever you take it upon yourself to do a task, add it to some text file that other agents read whenever they start on a new program or feature, or maybe send that you're starting the task to all other agents. To minimize noise, maybe add/send only when the roadmap file doesn't clearly say that the program or feature belongs to your own lane. 
Anyway, to answer the question, B, but I think before deleting anything else you should collect all of the built-in apps, categories, MIME types, apps, file types, per-role defaults, etc. and make sure they survive in the new place or wherever they belong. 
C-Q19: Either don't allow the user to change an event color to something too close to the accent color, or warn them if they do, and then leave it alone. And the same choice has to to be made in the other direction: the user changing the accent color to something that conflicts with an event color. I think that choice should definitely be "warn" rather than "don't allow," and in the warning, tell how to change the offending event color(s) and/or have a link right there to changing the event color(s). 
C-Q21: It doesn't matter how long it stays broken as long as it's fixed by the time the OS is finished, which is a long time from now, and doing things correctly is much more important than practical concerns like which lane does something anyway, so option A. Though I think that if a backup is missed because the machine is off, it shouldn't just ask when the user signs on, it should backup if the machine comes back on after it was missed even if the user hasn't signed on yet. And in that case, I don't think it should ask the user whether to backup or not regardless. By the way, I guess backup should be a service handled by our startup manager, whatever it's called? I don't know if that handles services run all the time too, or only things loaded when the user logs in. I think the former?
C-Q22: The user can always just use the menu to logout and login/switch accounts after it autologs in, so it's not that crucial, and I definitely don't want an unnecessary pause during bootup. But also provide the key they can hold during startup and show that it's available as soon as the OS gets control of the screen up until it starts the automatic login process. Also, either I'm  crazy, or some BIOSes allow the OS to show a little OS-loading widget ON the BIOS screen, maybe you could show that the key is available even there. 
To the second, smaller answer, I don't see the relation between the laptop being stolen and the recovery option being invoked - if the computer has autologin enabled, someone who steals it can get their files anyway, they wouldn't have to start recovery, and someone having a need to start recovery is also independent of the computer happening to have been stolen. But I guess it would be nice to skip auto-login during recovery anyway. 
C-Q23: B
B-Q9: The OS has to eventually be able to run Python and C++ correctly anyway, and Claude never did finish fully debugging the Rust implementation of Oils after 27 days. And as for "our Rust shell is small, boots early, and has no C++ runtime under it — which matters for a shell that has to work when little else does," the Rust implementation can always be kept as a discoverable option that can also be run when little else is working. And as for "our copy will always chase upstream, and any behaviour we have not re-created is a difference someone eventually trips over," I don't see how simply not worrying about chasing upstream changes in Oils could possibly be any worse than staying with our own Rust implementation which would effectively be a stale snapshot of the Oils version it was reimplemented aganist, only buggier. So, make the real Oils the default. 
B-Q12: This reminds me, the proposed format for exporting passwords from the password manager in plaintext was to do it in csv, but passwords can have any characters, including any combination of characters used to delimit a string or escape a character in csv, so make sure you don't mess that up. 
Anyway, to answer the question, maybe C, but it seems like it may be overkill since we're making the real Oils the default, and if the user has switched theirs to our Rust Oils and runs into a problem, they can simply temporarily use the real Oils instead. 
B-Q11: Claude's recommendation.
B-Q10: I think this is probably a bug in our grep. Please fix it, and make sure you fix both the Python version and the C++ version. 
A-Q13: The first, and see if you can "fix the checks" too.
A-Q11: Assign it to whatever lane you want, if another lane wants to change it too they can request the original lane to do it. And pick a lane for each of the remaining files without lanes, and make a rule somewhere that we don't leave files with ambiguous ownership. 
B-Q13: Claude's recommendation.
B-Q14: Claude's recommendation.
B-Q16: 1.
B-Q17: 2.
B-Q18: Claude's recommendation, though I noticed that Chromium is missing  from the list of large things to port. Have you ported that already? Oh, and one thing I forgot to mention, I want Mono (dotnet support for Linux) ported too, so record that. And record Chromium if it's somehow not recorded anymore. Another thing I want ported is Xonsh, and another is YSH, and another is Nushell. And QDirStat, or better, port my own fork of WinDirStat that can be found at d:\visual studio projects\dirsize\windirstat. Also, do we have a capable debugger, like cdb? We should port one or more of those, too. And I want a reimplementation of `d:\visual studio projects\backup` in a language we support, or if we get Mono ported, we can just run it on that. Record all of these that aren't recorded. 
B-Q19: Add it to claude.md of all three Claude accounts under c:\users\inhah
B-Q20: I don't understand why the behavior of the random-and-complement passes has to change just to support reading from a file or /dev/urandom, which should be a completely separate path. And I think the failure mode in which one full pass was done but not later passes is many times better than the failure mode in which half a file was overwritten and the other half not. But I'm having a lot of trouble understanding this particular open question in general. But I'd say if the user specifies /dev/urandom, just read from that as you pass over the file, as many times as they want. If the user specifies a file to read from for the data to overwrite with, read that file in chunks as it overwrites the deleted file, then on the next pass, start reading the random-data file from the beginning again. Fair?
B-Q21: Go with A for now, but create a list of all the 276 programs along with a short description for each, and at the end, give me options for your question of "what this OS is for" and maybe with some implications as to which option implies which programs would be removed. Also, were you saying that these 276 programs are not even easily discoverable? We should have a rule somewhere that if you make a program, record it somewhere so everybody knows it exists.
As for the second question, I guess there's no point in having both a fastpy and a Rust implementation of anything. Wait, yes there is. We may determine that the Rust implementation is better and make that the stock install, but the user may find Python much easier to edit. And vice versa, they may prefer Rust for some reason even if we think the Python version is better. Though another option is to keep the alternative versions in the repo but not included in the OS distribution. 
A-Q16: A, and I think you're also saying to "convert, read the arm, and revert any conversion that costs more than it is worth. The arm now exists to read," so do that.
A-Q17: B
A-Q18: A
A-Q21: B
