Q46: C, and do something about '"periodic" needs a trigger nobody has defined; in practice it tends to mean "never"'. Make a solution that will not result in "never" in practice.
Q47: I don't know, but regarding the problem of slowing down due to only one lane being able to build at a time, I don't know if that's really an issue because I think two builds going at a time would each take twice as long anyway due to CPU and filesystem I/O saturation? But also, the project was moved to E: since that question was made, which has about 300gb free. But I'd rather not use 120gb of space unnecessarily anyway. Oh, and as for pruning, I already had a session evaluate what can be regularly pruned that's actually dead without slowing down any future rebuilds, and it seemed to say relatively little could be spared..
Q56: I like A better. You say Linux programs expect ambient authority by construction, but if you simply suspend the linux program long enough to ask the user for permission, or the user gives it permission ahead of time, then that's not an issue, right? It can be done without making any functional difference for the Linux program - just warn the user that the Linux program may not work correctly without the permission. Also, we could have A but allow the user the option to grant all Linux programs the capabilities by default. Should native programs also be granted them by default? Also, do we have a mechanism to define what native programs (and also Linux programs) under a given account are grante by default? Because I think we should.
B-Q7: B, I think. One of the reasons for B, "It would create a dependency shape that exists nowhere in the tree yet," seems to be about the amount of work required to change it, and I generally want the best thing regardless of how much more work it might take (and by the way, is this in Slate OS's claude.md? If not, it should be), but it seems that there are enough other reasons to make B the right decision regardless?
B-Q8: I didn't fully understand the problem. Why wouldn't the table simply report how wide we actually do print each characters? And why wouldn't the GNU and bash programs ask how wide a given character/string would be, which I would think is the whole reason for having such a table, and then adjust their output accordingly so that everything works right?
Q57: A and fix the error message.
C-Q6: C, but make sure the shell and settings pages use the style of .\Aero Desktop (offline).html. Well, some aspects of the style should use current settings so that the OS can have different themes. The other aspect should be based on the html demo, and the default theme should be, too. If this isn't already in roadmap-detailed.md, it should be.
C-Q7: I have no problem with the highlight being white, why does it have to be a color? As for cyan, that's blue+green, and I would think the blue component would survive the red-green color blindness for distinguishing? That's the same component that makes magenta survive it, because magenta is blue+red, and green is apparently confused with red? B might be an equally good option, though. But this is all just all theoretical, you may know more about specific color blindness weaknesses and strengths in practice. Also, whatever the default is, I think this should be configurable by the user, too.
C-Q8: B
C-Q9: I don't already have any rules that use [], and I don't think anybody else uses my backup program, let alone in the OS, but I guess not having character classes for backup programs is normal anyway. But maybe we should change file searching and indexing so that they -don't- contain character classes so that they match the backup program? A. what's normal in that regard, and B. what's the likelihood that the user will really benefit from character classes?
A-Q1: C, though I'm concerned that for someone not familiar with the tool, "b" would naturally be assumed to mean bytes. But I guess there's nothing we can do about that, I don't see a way to do it that's both intuitive and compliant. If we disallow 100 and make 100b be bytes, that bites anyone who's already familiar with the tool. If we allow 100 and make it be bytes, that also bites anyone who's already familiar with the tool. Either could be mitigated with warnings printed when those parameters are used, but I think that would still annoy Linux users.
A-Q2: A
A-Q3: Is there any advantage in the long run to doing A now, D eventually rather than just doing D now? And is the OS currently usable on actual hardware?
An account with no password: should the lock screen let it through, or refuse forever? (lane C, 2026-08-24): C
A-Q4: A
A-Q5: A, though I have my own grep utility - a Python implementation and a C++ implementation - under `d:\visual studio projects\grep`. It has some features I made that normal grep doesn't, that I like, but it also lacks some features that standard grep has, so it'd probably be better to integrate my grep's additional features with Slate OS's grep so that it has all the GNU grep features plus my additions.
SlateOS has no way to encrypt anything. Which cipher do we add, and who owns it? (lane C, 2026-08-26): Do whichever option would allow for the the fastest encryption/decryption on a machine that has AES-NI, unless the bottelneck is always filesystem throughput rather than CPU. About option C, why is it harder to audit in-tree, why does it need auditing, and what does in-tree mean? For the lane, I don't know, I'll let you decide which you think is best. Do whatever's most consistent with the rest of the project, I guess. 
A-Q6: A
2,288 of the 2,756 commands in userspace/ report success for work they never did. Which ones do we keep? (lane B, 2026-09-02): Why not delet all of them that don't work, rather than just the ones that can never work? You said yourself tat a command's existence itself is a claim, and it could be misleading not only to scripts and installers, but users who see the command's existence. The ones that don't work but could work later can simply be added when we actually implement them?
C-Q10: I want you to make me an web program that will show a shaded card with main text, secondary text and accent, with the options for the current colors vs your choices for A vsy our choices for B, a way for me to pick arbitrary colors for the three text types and the shaded card color, and something that constantly views the current contrast ratio number for each of the three current colors on the current background. Also, have the shaded card on a wider area that's not shaded that alslo has all text types. 
A-Q7: d:\visual studio projects was already excluded for the virus scan, so I don't know what the 70 ms was. Also, the project was since moved from the HDD to an SSD. As for everything being slower, it could be because my CPU is often pegged lately, and the filesystem could be under more heavy load too. And failing to delete things could be because I have two continuous local backup jobs going at all times *and* two continuous cloud backups.
The test machine cannot produce random numbers, on purpose, and about eighteen tests in the apps now depend on that. Should it start? (lane B, 2026-09-05): A. By the way, can and should we provide sophisticated randomization options such as bell curve, etc.?










